since the dawn of my channel the number
one question I have been asked is
procrastination as a word is thrown
around a lot it's become a signature
part of our vocabulary we are always
putting off doing things and that's
hardly surprising given how active
modern society is and how many things
there are for us to get distracted by
and so finally I have decided to share
my top tips for avoiding procrastination
like anyone else I do procrastinate but
I have trained myself to avoid
procrastination and hopefully by using
these tips you can do the same for me
it's so important that I get stuck into
my tasks quickly and I just make the
most out of my time as I can okay so
this video is going to be separated into
three sections first of all we are going
to look at resistance and how we can
eliminate resistance to tasks and make
it easier for us to choose to be
productive secondly we are going to look
at identifying distractions and finally
we are going to tackle the question of
what I should do first in order to
prevent myself and getting distracted
okay so one of the most important things
we can do is to make it easier not to
procrastinate we procrastinate by
checking our phones tidying our rooms
reading that book creep and wanting to
read because this seems easier than
undertaking the task which we've got to
do and so everything becomes a lot
easier when we don't give ourselves that
choice
dark times lie ahead of us and there
will be a time where we have to choose
between what is easy and what is right
wise words of Professor Dumbledore
unfortunately for us humans always seem
to choose the easiest option but we can
get us to do the thing we want to do if
we just eliminate the easier option
we're trying to limit the amount of
choice we have so that we're encouraged
to do the thing which we want to do I
have said this time and time again but I
really really recommend using a
timetable when you study especially if
you're gonna have a long study day and
there is a lot of stuff that you need to
get done I know it will seem like
overkill especially if you're planning
and
I'm in a timetable but trust me when I
say that you will get so much more for
your time if you plan it properly and
timetables once again are useful when it
comes to avoiding procrastination
timetables
reduce the amount of resistance you have
to tasks because everything is already
mapped out in front of you and you give
yourself less of a choice so then you
have these two options you've got going
on your phone and you've got completing
this essay if that essay is scheduled
into your day you're more likely to
complete it I think then if you've just
written down that you need to complete
it but not saying this is going to
completely stop you from procrastinating
but in practice I found that it prevents
you from procrastinating so write out
your to-do list and then transfer it to
a minute-by-minute timetable so
literally just plunk them from one this
to the other to do this I will just run
through all of my - dues and I will make
a note next up how long it will take me
using those timeframes I will just
transfer it into a timetable and this is
really important because it shows you
realistically how much you can
accomplish I mean I'm all for ambition I
think when we have a sunny day we should
be ambitious we should try to get as
much done as we can get done but if
you're over ambitious and then you don't
get everything done that can be very
demotivating and then that can have a
knock-on effect on your productivity or
the next day the day after which in turn
will make you more likely to
procrastinate of course this wouldn't be
a study tips video I didn't reference
Parkinson's law Parkinson's law states
that the amount of time taken to
complete a task will lengthen to fill
the amount of time provided this makes
setting time constraints super important
when I give myself time to complete a
task in practice I find that I just work
more productively because I know I've
got to finish it by the deadline coming
up if you do timetable tasks and if you
do set time constraints then I feel like
you're more likely to actually get that
work done to be more focused when you're
getting it done and not get distracted
because you've got less time to complete
it it kind of works in the same way that
you know right before a test or an exam
or a coursework essay deadline you can
work so productively right before that
essay is due if you haven't got
something done you force yourself to
work in a really focused way and what
we're trying to do is mirror this I mean
realistically you can
a perfectly mirror this because the
amount of pressure that you feel coming
up to an actual deadline is a lot more
than I think you can put on yourself but
accountability is so important and part
of that is building up confidence and
trust in yourself because it has to mean
something for you to set yourself an
internal deadline it has to have the
same kind of weight as if someone
externally we're sending me something
remember that your promises to yourself
are just as important as external ones
okay now moving into the second section
of this video which is identifying
distractions during your next study
session or ideally over the course of
the week I really encourage you to make
a note of all of the things that end up
distracting you from your work the
things that cause you to procrastinate
the ammunition - procrastination is
destruction so it's really important
that you know what things distract you
by doing so you can prevent the
procrastination coming from firing butts
so for example one thing that I find
always leads to me procrastinating and
getting distracted with my work is if my
room isn't tidy I know from experience
if I'm in a messy room I will not stop
working until my room is completely tidy
the solution now I make sure my room is
tidy before I start studying so
realizing this I have been able to
incorporate hiding my room into my study
routine now every evening I will make
sure that my room is completely tidy so
that I am ready to wake up in the
morning and get started with focused
work without getting distracted or
procrastinating at all I feel like the
phone is the big one and so here are
three quick tips on how to avoid
procrastinating on your phone number one
keep your phone outside of your room
number two I would recommend deleting
your social media apps and then just
redownload in them after whether you
find you keep on opening them on default
and finally try downloading the app
forest which is a way of preventing you
from going on other apps on your phone
when you're working quick sidenote to me
just talking about tidying my room as
well it's really really key I find to
have a clean workspace airy light bright
I spoke about this in my productivity
video where I spoke about how to have
like a good study space this is a really
small thing but I find that when I'm
working on a white desk I'm less likely
to get distracted I know that's really
strange and that's probably very
signature to just me when I study in
libraries or if I work on campus
university I always make sure that I
find a white table because I'm less
likely to get distracted and start
procrastinating so with your timetable
if you're not sure how you can keep
yourself accountable and keep that
momentum going there are two main things
I would recommend you could use forests
so for example if you're setting
a 40-minute task just go into forest and
set yourself a 40-minute timer which
means that you can't go on your phone
whilst you're doing the task without
your tree dying it's a really great app
that's worth looking into
second thing you could use is just
normal timers just set a time of
yourself on your phone and when it goes
off you can move on to the next task
alternatively you could block out
specific sections of your week where you
get your work done the now habit
recommends that you try a clocking in
and out system so you challenge yourself
to do all of your work in 20 hours per
week for example and this forces focus
work and prevents you from getting
distracted because you can't afford to
you've only got 20 minutes to work with
just on the subject of planning I also
want to run through master to do this
for you which is something that I swear
by I always keep a master to-do list on
my desk this is my one at the moment so
when I'm working I will often remember
something I've got to do something tiny
is a bit of admin or I'll see an email
pop-up and I used to worry so much that
if I didn't get it done right that
second I would just completely forget
about it I always found myself getting
distracted while I was working and going
and get that thing sorted and then
coming back to my work but having that
small break and having that break in my
sense of flow I'd always find myself
procrastinating so the way that I
resolved this was by using a master
to-do list so you can make one for
yourself literally just keep a piece of
paper on your desk and when something
comes up write it down so that you can
forget about it just write it down and
get back on with your work but I did
actually design a master to do this
right now sell on my website because I
thought it would be more useful to have
everything in nicely neat little
sections this is the one I use but you
can easily just make one yourself as
well if you wanted to
so then the third thing that we are
going to talk about is which task should
I start with fast in order to prevent
procrastination and maximize
productivity have you heard of frogs and
banisters something that my head of
state form spoke about quite a lot
basically the idea that you should start
with the harder task and then you should
move on to your easier tasks at the end
of the day but here's the harder tasks
and the things that are going to fill
you with the most resistance and usually
we are almost motivated in the morning
so best time to do it is when we've a
sit-down study I completely agree that
that really hard daunting task should be
very early on in your timetable or to-do
list but I don't think it should be the
first thing the first thing where to-do
list is always something that I'm
excited to do something which is fairly
easy to get done something which isn't
gonna take very long time and time again
I have reference this quote from Jeff
Hayden success leads to motivation leads
to success it leads to more motivations
the idea is that to enhance motivation
you need to have small successes so by
starting your day with a small success
it motivates you to keep on going until
you get that bigger task done as your
second task of the day if you start with
that task and it's gonna take you three
four hours the whole way through your
morning you are not going to protect a
single thing off your to-do list and
actually that is quite demotivating and
that can lead to you starting to
procrastinate however if you have got
that one quick thing done in the morning
you can look down it or to do this and
you think you know what I've actually
accomplished quite a lot I just find
that an enhances motivation and it leads
to less procrastination and if that
doesn't work then try this big tasks are
the easiest ones to procrastinate with
so I just recommend breaking these up
into smaller tasks to make them more
manageable it's easier to stomach and as
you take through the list it feels like
you're getting stuff done so for example
if I'm writing an essay for university
like a coursework essay I will usually
separate my tardiness into introduction
paragraph one paragraph to paragraph
three and even though the essay would
take me five hours and I'll be sat there
for five hours I'm ticking things off so
it feels like right
being productive
first quick tip tell yourself you only
need to do five minutes of work and then
you're done if you're finding it really
hard and you're really resisting sitting
down to do work then set a five-minute
timer say to yourself all you've got to
do is work for five minutes and then you
can get up you can go watch TV you can
go read that book tidy or you can go do
all those things that you want to
progress neat on but first of all you
just have to do five minutes of work sit
down and you'll realize that it really
wasn't as bad as you need or you just
need to overcome that initial resistance
the five minutes acts as a catalyst
which means you're over able to overcome
that activation energy and actually get
started with the work and get that work
done
I am quite a perfectionist and so I will
put off doing things that I want to do
perfectly because I'm scared that if I
sit down to do it right now I won't do
it perfectly I didn't do it right so I
ended up putting things off for ages and
the way that I avoid resistance with
this is I set a timer for 30 minutes to
sit down and write something so still
same need to do this assay I set a timer
for 30 minutes and I've got to write as
much as I can in 30 minutes and it
doesn't matter how bad it is that's the
main thing you're like this can be bad
this can be absolutely atrocious and
there's no pressure then on yourself to
do it perfectly and you will realize
that your first draft is a lot better
than you thought it would be and there's
always a lot less resistance when you're
editing things as opposed to you writing
them for the first time your first draft
is always the hardest thing
okay so those are my top tips for
avoiding procrastination I hope that you
found this video helpful and I hope that
you have a productive week
[Music]